Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to extend the very familiar arithmetic
with rational numbers to a wider setting where
infinity appears but the infinity that we're
going to introduce is not at all abstract or
philosophical it's actually just very simply tied
down to the geometry of the plane so the rational
number system of course is for us a absolutely
fundamental arena for doing mathematics in my view
the rational numbers are the core of arithmetic
and almost all of mathematics is somehow linked
to the rational numbers the real numbers play a
very dubious role as far as I'm concerned so the
rational numbers with the four familiar operations
addition multiplication subtraction division is
an almost perfect arena for arithmetic but it's
not quite perfect the reason is that division
by zero is not allowed and this of course is
a very common source of errors in mathematics
because it's very easy to forget when you have
a fraction or a rational number to check that
that denominator is nonzero so what we're going
to do today is we're going to look at the very
familiar framework that we've already established
natural numbers integers fractions and rational
numbers we're thinking about extending that now
to this sort of larger framework by introducing
more formally the arithmetic of integral points
we've already talked a little bit about that
in our last video we're going to extend that
discussion and then we're going to use the
arithmetic of integral points to introduce the
extended rational numbers which is essentially the
rational numbers where we adjoin infinity and then
the possibility emerges that we can think about
number arithmetic not by going from the integers
to the rational numbers directly but rather by
going through this admittedly longer route by
going from the integers to the integer points to
their extended rationals and then to the rational
numbers in other words we'll see the opportunity
of being able to think of the rational numbers as
just a sub framework of this larger and perhaps
more fundamental framework the extended rational
numbers so these are somewhat unfamiliar ideas if
you're a professional mathematician you may feel
the ground wobbling a little bit underneath your
feet but from a geometrical point of view this
approach I think you will see is very natural
although the implications for arithmetic and
analysis I think are still waiting to be worked
out we have a lot on our plate to do and I'm
going to leave a number of things for you to do so
it'll be quite a lot of opportunity for you to get
your hands dirty roll up your sleeves and get to
work making computations and checking things so
we've already talked last time what the integral
points these are just pairs of integers enclosed
in square brackets and we introduced a couple
of operations with these objects first of all
we defined scalar multiplication what it means to
multiply an integer point by another integer so
C times the point a B is the new point CA CB call
the scalar multiplication and then we had notions
of rational addition and rational multiplication
so the sum of a b and c d is ad plus BC BD while
the product is AC BT today we're also going
to introduce two new operations rational
subtraction and rational division so we have all
four operations defined on these integral points
rational subtraction looks a lot like rational
addition except instead of a having a plus sign
here we have a minus sign so it's ad minus BC
comma BT and rational division looks a lot like
rational multiplication except that the role of
D and C are interchanged so a B divided by C D
is a d comma B C and we're going to use these
notations for our operations the plus and the
minus or the addition and the subtraction are
going to be enclosed in a circle to distinguish
them from the more familiar addition of vectors
or subtraction of vectors the multiplication and
the division are not going to have circles around
them because there is no standard multiplication
or division for vectors or points normally anyway
so these are somewhat new operations but we don't
want to confuse these addition and subtraction
operations with the addition of vectors like a
B plus C D is a plus C comma B plus D that's
not what we're doing here and let's emphasize
that all these operations require only integer
arithmetic they're always defined doesn't matter
whether some or all of the integers involved are
zero okay so we're working pier Li with integer
arithmetic and we don't in fact even need to know
any rational arithmetic here so in principle what
I'm doing here could have been introduced much
earlier in this series just after we introduced
integer arithmetic we could have introduced this
arithmetic of integral points one more concept
that was useful was the notion of the height
of a point so the height of the point a B is
the second coordinate B so now we have four
operations defined on these new objects these
integral points so in our last video we talked a
little bit about some of the main laws involving
addition and multiplication so I remind you what
they are here are the commutative laws here are
the two associative laws and then we had these
rather unfamiliar distributive laws where we
have to multiply this expression by the height of
P in order for this side to equal the familiar P
times Q plus P times R and the other way around
we have to multiply the side by the height of R
in order for this thing to be equal to P times R
plus Q times R and although this is unfamiliar it
is in some sense more balanced than the usual one
because the P appearing twice on the right hand
side is now also appearing twice on the left hand
side which means that this is somehow homogeneous
in an important way that will be significant later
on so these are familiar from last time now we're
going to introduce some more laws because we
have these two new operations of subtraction
and division so these are sort of associative
laws these three here P plus Q minus R equals
P plus Q minus R P minus Q plus R equals P minus
Q minus R and P minus Q minus R equals P minus Q
plus R and I'm going to leave it to you as an
exercise to prove these so you can write down
proofs by well setting P equal to a B Q equal to
C D are equal to EF for example calculating the
left hand side calculating the right hand side
showing that they're in fact equal and here are
two examples that illustrate a couple of these
laws so for example here this one illustrates
I suppose this one here so 2/3 minus 1/4 plus -1
1 that's the left hand side and over here we have
the right hand side 2/3 minus 1/4 - minus-15
let's just check this last line what does it
say so - 3 - 1 4 how do we compute that 2 times
4 minus 3 times 1 that is 8 minus 3 that's 5 and
then the second entry is just the product 3 times
4 12 we have to subtract minus 1 1 how do we do
that 5 times 1 minus 12 times minus 1 so that's
5 plus 12 the first entry and the second entry is
the product of the last 2 is 12 so we can check
these laws in special cases which is a very good
thing for you to do we also have some associative
type laws involving multiplication and division
for example P times Q / R is the same as P times
Q / R P divided by Q times R is P divided by Q
divided by R + P divided by Q / R is P divided
by Q times R and again I'm going to leave the
proofs of these things as exercise for you to do
let's just have a look at this last one here in
the case of 3/4 divided by 0 2 divided by minus
1/5 that's the same as 3/4 divided by this thing
divided by this means the first entry here times
the second entry here which is 0 times 5 0 then
comma this for a second entry here times the first
entry here that's minus 2 and then this divided by
this will be this product which is minus 6 comma
this product which is 0 if we do it the other way
around the right hand side would be 3/4 divided by
0 2 times minus 1/5 so this quotient is 3 times 2
0 times 4 and then we have to multiply by minus
1/5 that's just multiplying the corresponding
elements 6 times minus 1 and zero times five
is zero so these are simpler than the addition
subtraction associative laws and interestingly
these laws have exactly the same format as the
previous ones with addition and subtraction so if
you replace the multiplication and division with
addition and subtraction then these have exactly
the same form as ones on the previous slide and we
also have some more distributive laws so if we
combine multiplication with subtraction we get
distributive laws that are exactly the same as
the ones involving multiplication and addition
so P times Q minus R times the height of P is P
times Q minus P times R and the other way around
P minus Q times R you have to multiply by H of R
and then we get R times P minus Q times R there
is also distributive laws involving division just
as there are four rational numbers but divisions
not quite as symmetrical as multiplication so
there's not two sets of laws there's only laws
involving expressions like P plus Q divided by r
or P minus Q divided by R so here the expression
is P plus Q divided by R times L of R equals
P divided by R plus Q divided by R what is L
well L represents a new object the length of
an integral point will just define that to be
the first coordinate so the height is the second
coordinate let's say that the first coordinate
is the length and so that's the number that
we have to multiply by here to preserve the
homogeneity when we're dividing and the same
law when addition is replaced with subtraction
so let's give an example here first of all please
prove these and here's an example so we have 2 3
minus 1 minus 1 divided by 5 4 so when we
calculate all of that that's the left-hand
side we should multiply by the length of our the
length of our here is 5 all right so what does
this become becomes 5 times the 2 3 minus 1 minus
1 is minus 2 minus 3s that's minus 5 followed by
minus 3 divided by 5 for and so that's all
together 5 times this divided by this will
be the minus 5 times the 4 which is minus 20 and
then the minus 3 times the 5 which is minus 15 on
the other hand 2 3 / 5 4 - 1 - 1 / 5 4 what's that
well this quotient is 815 that product followed by
that product and this quotient is the 1/4 followed
by the minus 1 times 5 so it's 4 minus 5 so what
to subtract these two how do we do that it's 8
times -5 minus 15 times 4 so minus 40 minus 60
for a total of minus 100 followed by the product
15 times minus 5 is minus 75 and this and this are
the same because 5 times this is just minus 100
and minus 75 there are also some special integral
points ones that play distinguished roles just
as in the rational numbers we have some special
numbers primarily 0 and 1 and also minus 1 so here
are some laws that involve special integral points
the point 0 1 acts as 0 additively so when we add
it to any integral point a B we get a B the point
1 1 like the number 1 so 1 1 times a B equals a
B 0 1 times a B is 0 B and this number 1 0 also
plays a role new kind of role that's what we're
going to be calling infinity shortly so 1 0 times
a B is a 0 kind of complementing multiplying by 0
multiplying by this sort of infinite element has
a sort of complimentary aspect when we add 1 0
to a B we get also B 0 B plus 0 comma 0 and then
there's this other element this new object 0 0
which is the central integral point and it has
the property that when we add it to anything
we get 0 0 when we multiply it by anything we
get 0 0 in fact also when we subtract it or
divide it by 0 0 we get 0 0 so a B minus 0
0 is 0 0 may be divided by 0 0 is also 0 0
so any operation involving 0 0 outputs 0 0
also a B minus 0 1 is a B corresponds to taking
a number and subtracting 0 we get the number back
taking a number dividing by 1 gives us the number
back if we take a B and we subtract 1 0 this is
like subtracting sort of an infinite object
then we get minus B 0 which is also another
infinite object an a/b divided by 1 0 is 0 B and
finally the relationship between sort of 1 and
minus 1 for take 1 1 we add minus 1 1 we get 0 1
so this is a pleasant new domain for arithmetic
we're doing arithmetic very precisely with the
integral points in the plane and it parallel
to rational number arithmetic but it's not quite
it's a separate thing that stands poorly on its
own and it's quite a pleasant thing because it
leads to this extended rational number system
where we're including some new object infinity to
our familiar rational numbers so before we take
this step of going from these integral points
to these extended rational numbers we have to
talk about another kind of law that homogeneity
laws and these are laws that don't have a direct
analog for rational numbers here's a theorem
and here are the four operations again just to
remind you what their form is so one interesting
thing about these four operations is that they're
all homogeneous that means they respect scalar
multiplication and that's what this theorem is
capturing so what's the theorem say it says that
if you take say any two integral points P and Q
and any integer lambda then if you take lambda
times P and you add Q that's the same thing as
lambda times P plus Q which is also the same
as P plus lambda Q so the multiple can be put
either in front of the first point or in front
of the second point or in front of the combined
expression all three things are equal and why is
that true well have a look at the addition formula
the addition formula involves a and B right here
there's an A there there's a B there and there's
a B there it means that if we multiply this thing
by five let us say meaning we multiply both a and
B by five then this gets multiplied by five this
gets multiplied by five and this gets multiplied
by five so both terms here get multiplied by
five and the whole point gets multiplied by
five and similar to the dependence on C and D
well there's a D here a see here and a D here
so again if we multiply this by some number of
five or lambda then this whole expression gets
multiplied by that corresponding lambda and that
homogeneity or it's kind of a linearity holes for
all four operations each of those four operations
has the property that if we look at its dependence
on just one of the points it's linear in that
point so a B there's an A there and a B there
here there's an A there and be there and be there
here there's an A there and be there and so on so
exactly the same logic is going to mean that
the same law Attis fide by all four operations
now let's see how we're going to introduce
the extended rational numbers we have these
integral points and very clear arithmetic with
them involving four operations which are always
defined and now we want to take that framework
and extract from it an extended rational number
system and we're going to think geometrically
and the the key idea really is the key idea
of projective geometry that if you have an affine
space like a plane then it's interesting to think
about lines through the origin the lines through
the origin form what's called a projective space
associated to the affine space so if you have
a two dimensional affine space and you look at
the lines through the origin that gives you a one
dimensional projective space which is often called
the projective line so that's our motivation and
what we're going to do is the following we're
going to introduce this extended rational number
framework in the following way we're going to look
at our integral points which are represented by
all these dots and we're going to look at lines
through the origin say that one there or maybe
that one there or maybe the horizontal one which
is very important or maybe the vertical one which
is also very important and what we're going to
do is we're going to lump all or almost all the
points on a line together so what you can think
about here is is forming it team we're going
to organize all our integral points into teams
and all the points which are on one line through
the origin are going to form one team with a very
important exception that the point 0 0 which lies
on every line is going to be excluded from all of
those teams and it's going to form a separate
team okay so in projective geometry this point
0 0 which lies on all of the lines always place
some sort of distinguished role and what we're
going to do is we're going to think of that as
being a some separate kind of object so how are
we going to do this well let's have a look at this
line here so on this line there are points say 2
1 right there for 2 right there it all be also be
6 3 and here is minus 2 minus 1 that lies on that
line minus 4 minus 2 lies on that line so we're
considering all the points that lie on the line
both in this direction and in this direction but
only the integral points because we're only doing
integer arithmetic at this point we want to lump
all these points together so we're going to refer
to this line the name of this line is going to be
2 over 1 we introduced this notation by taking one
of these points and writing it not as a point but
writing it as something over something else 2 over
1 and we're going to agree that that line is the
same as the line 4 over 2 because the point 4 2
also lies on that line and it's also minus 2 over
a minus 1 because that point lies on the line and
minus 4 minus 2 because that point lies on the
line however 0 0 is not going to be included in
this equation so we're going to be defining a
new object which is which you can think of as
being the team formed by all the nonzero points
on this line and this is going to be the name for
that new team but this is also the name for that
new team so same thing that we do with rational
number we're gonna agree that this name is the
same as that name okay another variant here's
another example here's another line it has points
like 1 minus 1 2 minus 2 minus 2 2 and so on and
so we're going to give this line the name 1 over
minus 1 or 2 over minus 2 or 3 over minus 3 or
minus 1 over 1 many other possibilities if you
choose any interval point which lies on that line
which is not 0 0 and use that to make the name for
this line there's also the vertical line that's
important for us it has points this one here is 0
1 0 2 0 3 0 minus 1 0 minus 2 so here are various
names for this vertical line 0 / 1 0 / 2 0 / 3
etc but we also have the horizontal line which
is just as legitimate a line as this line is here
and the points on it aren't points like 1 0 2 0
3 0 minus 1 0 minus 2 0 so this line is going to
have these as its names 1 / 0 or 2 / 0 / 3 / 0 or
minus 1 over 0 and so on so every line through the
origin which passes through these integral points
will now be a new object and then we say that
we're going to treat this point here separately
so we should include it also in the story so here
it is this point by itself is going to be given
the name 0 / a 0 because it's the point 0 0 and it
sort of represents a team all by itself and this
is a reasonable and consistent thing to do because
the 0 0 element is an important and valid integral
point in the arithmetic of integral points so
we cannot exclude it it's part of the story
so this is going to be called the extended
rational number system and our familiar
rational numbers are going to correspond to
the lines that pass through this line y equals
1 so all the lines except for the horizontal
one I'm going to pass through this line and
they're going to correspond to ordinary
rational numbers where the denominators
are not 0 this horizontal line is going to
correspond to a new kind of object 1 over
0 that's not an ordinary rational number we
can call that infinity if we like so this new
line is going to be given the name either
1 over 0 or infinity but we're also going
to have to introduce this new object 0 over 0
which represents the single integral point 0 0
and that's how we're gonna get the extended
rational numbers a new and enlarged and maybe
more beautiful domain for doing arithmetic worth
your very serious consideration let's see how it
looks like more officially this is a geometrical
picture a motivation for it but we want to set it
up without any pictures so here is our official
definition of an extended rational number and
we could in principle have introduced this
much earlier in this series just after we've
introduced integers and integer arithmetic so
before we actually introduced rational numbers
we could have done this now perhaps on other
planets in the solar system this is how young
people are taught first they're taught natural
number arithmetic then integers then integral
points then extended rational numbers and then
only afterwards restrict to rational numbers ok
so what is an extended rational number it is just
an ordered pair a B of integers an ordered pair a
B of integers where there's no condition on a
and B B does not have to be nonzero and we're
going to write this ordered pair in this fashion
and we're gonna say a over B okay as we proceed
probably often we will use a horizontal bar
instead of a slanted bar but officially it's
a slanted bar b representing this extended
rational number and part and parcel of the
definition is this important notion of equality
when are two such expressions equal this is
exactly the same kind of thing that we did when
we introduced rational numbers we'll say that a
over B equals C over D precisely when a D equals
BC and at least one of a and B is nonzero and at
least one of C D is nonzero when we were doing
rational numbers we also have exactly the same
kind of thing but we didn't have any of this we
just said a B equals C D precisely when a equals
BC because for rational numbers one of these
is always nonzero one of these is always non
zero but here the possibility is that we might
have a and B both being zero we do not want to
say that 0 0 is equal to anything else so for
example 2 over 3 is equal to 4 over 6 because
2 times 6 equals 3 times 4 3 over 0 always the
same as minus 2 over 0 why because 3 times 0
equals 0 times minus 2 this is valid because
both of these are not 0 both of these are not
0 0 over 7 is the same as 0 over minus 24 because
0 times minus 24 is the same as 7 times 0 this is
our way of grouping together all the elements on
the line to form 1 single guy and the purpose of
this qualification is to avoid making 0/0 lie on
every line if we didn't say this then zero zero
would be equal to everything because zero times
this always equals zero times this no matter what
this is but we're going to use this stipulation
so that zero is over zero is not equal to 2 over
3 0 over 0 is not equal to 5 over zero and zero
over zero is not equal to zero over 4 we want
zero over zero to be something separate so that's
extended rational numbers don't as objects that's
what they are that condition of equality can
be restated so another way of expressing the
Equality between a over B and C over D is to say
that it occurs when M times a B equals n times C
D these are the integral points for some nonzero
integers N and M I can leave that as an exercise
for you to think about that the condition can be
restated in this way okay so now we have extended
rational numbers we want to define the operations
and here are the operations a over B plus C over D
is no surprise ad plus BC over BD a over B times C
over D is AC over BD a over B minus C over D is ad
minus BC over B D and a over B divided by C over D
is ad over BC so we're taking the four operations
from integral points and just transferring them
directly to the teens to these extended rational
numbers so we must check now that these operations
are well-defined because after all the names for
the extended rational numbers are not unique just
as the names for rational numbers are not unique
so just as we had to check that the operations
for rational numbers were well defined we have
to check that these are also well defined and
for that it comes down to the homogeneity laws
the fact that when you multiply both a and B by
a scalar then this thing is not changing and the
form of the the product means that that scalar
is a again appearing here and here in the same
way so we're getting equal numbers so please
check that these operations are well-defined
and you might like to write down the laws of
arithmetic that we get I'm going to do that
next time but it's probably a great exercise for
you to to write down the laws of arithmetic which
include the laws for rational numbers but go
beyond to also include these new objects that
we've got now we have two new objects which
are not familiar rational numbers we've got
1 over 0 and we've got 0 over 0 and we're going
to give this thing a name sort of a separate name
we're going to sometimes refer to it simply as
infinity the figure-eight lying on its side so
the Infinity here has a very precise meaning it
corresponds to their extended rational number
of 1 over 0 which corresponds exactly to the
horizontal line in our picture of integral points
yeah so just go back to the geometry there's
nothing ambiguous about this thing at all it
just corresponds to the horizontal line as opposed
to some line with some some vertical direction and
we have this special point 0 over 0 we're going to
also give that a new symbol we're going to refer
to it with this little star I think that's a good
symbol for it because it sort of represents the
fact that it's the meet of all these lines ok so
that's going to be the symbol four zero over zero
but what should the name four zero over zero be
what I don't know and so I'd like to suggest an
interesting challenge for you is to suggest an
appropriate name for zero over zero all right so
maybe in the next few months we can have a think
about that and then we'll collect all the various
suggestions and we'll we'll decide on a new name
for this new mathematical object we're extending
mathematics in a direction that perhaps has not
really been looked at at least not too much and
we'd be interested ultimately in extending not
just arithmetic but maybe also analysis to this
larger domain so next time we're going to have a
look at the laws of arithmetic with these extended
rational numbers we'll look at how we get the
rational numbers from the extended rational
numbers and we're going to think about visualizing
these things in practice how do we actually draw
infinity on the page I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
Oh